{{Update|date = 27 January 2001}}

Ranged combat - You now gain experience for each successful hit, so it's easier to advance a level. Arrows also now fire 25% faster, and I've fixed the cheat/bug which some people were using to shoot super rapidly. 

Magic - 4 new spells have been added which are: Fear, Wind-bolt, Rock-skin, and Elemental-bolt. The bolt spells have also been made much more powerful, and they are no longer dependant on your ranged-combat skill. This means each type of bolt now does a fixed maximum-damage, and to shoot more powerful bolts you need to use high level spells. Finally the staffs have been improved such that if you are wielding a fire-staff, water-staff, air-staff or earth-staff it acts as unlimited runes of that type! 

Player killing - Due to a large number of requests I've changed the way this works. Firstly you can no longer log-out during combat! Closing the webpage or disconnecting your modem will NOT work either! However to compensate I've made it so if you retreat in the game, the person attacking you is stunned for 2 seconds to give you a better chance of getting away. Also when you die you now get to keep your 3 most valuable items! You will still probably lose any ore, food, money, spare weapons, etc... but at least you will no longer lose an item you'd just spent days saving up for! This means if you keep your spare money in the bank you should now be relatively safe.

[[Category:Updates|{{PAGENAME}}]]
[[Category:Glitches]]
[[Category:Ranged]]
[[Category:Gameplay]]
[[Category:Magic]]
